
# Impact of Trump super-spreader rallies on COVID-19 deaths in United States #

[Abstract]

This project investigates the possible effects of Trump campaign rallies
on the spread of COVID-19 during the summer and fall of 2020.  Counts of
COVID-19 deaths were collected for a six-week period both before and
after each of 68 Trump campaign rallies that spanned a time period from
June 20, 2020 to November 2, 2020. The counts were collected at the
county level for the counties in which the rallies were held. For each
rally, a percentage change in COVID-19 deaths was calculated. Of the 68
rallies, 39 showed an increase in COVID-19 deaths and 29 showed either a
decrease (25) or no change (4). In addition, increases or decreases in
deaths appeared to be geographically clustered; and increases in deaths
appeared to reflect the progression of the pandemic more generally.
Based on these findings--especially the findings that COVID-19 deaths
_decreased_ in some cases--we cannot conclude that Trump's campaign
rallies were a primary cause of subsequent COVID-19 deaths.


# Data #

For data that indicates the spread of COVID-19, I use the COVID-19 Data
Repository by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at
Johns Hopkins University hosted on
[GitHub](https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19).

The dates and locations for President Trump's rallies in the file
`data/trump-rallies.csv` are taken from the following location on
Wikipedia.

[Wikipedia: Trump 2020 Campaign Rallies][trump_rallies]

Note that Trump did not hold any rallies during the months of April and
May, 2020.

The US state abbreviations data file `data/state-abbr.csv` is derived
from the table at the following location on Wikipedia.

[Wikipedia: List of US state and territory abbreviations][state_abbr]

The [shape data](ftp://ftp2.census.gov/geo/tiger/TIGER2019/STATE/)
for the geospatial plots is from the [US Census](https://www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/tiger-line-file.html)


## Licensing ##

The data from Wikipedia is used under the [_Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License_][wiki_license]

The data from the Johns-Hopkins COVID-19 data repository is licensed
under _Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)_ as
described on [GitHub](https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19).

The shape data provided by the US Census Bureau is presumed to be public
domain as it is published by the US federal government.

[trump_rallies]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_post-election_Donald_Trump_rallies#2020_campaign_rallies

[state_abbr]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_U.S._state_and_territory_abbreviations

[wiki_license]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text_of_Creative_Commons_Attribution-ShareAlike_3.0_Unported_License


### --- END --- ###

